
 30-year Dialogue Relations and the Challenges Ahead1
Muhadi Sugiono 
The Dialogue Relations between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United States (US), entering its 30th anniversary this year, have no doubt brought about positive impacts on both sides. Economically the relationship has resulted in strong economic ties between two parties. According to the US Department of State (2007), for example, ASEAN collectively is now the fourth major US trading partner, with last year’s trade flows between the two parties reached US$ 168 billion. In addition, US companies have also invested significantly, nearly US$ 90 billion, in ASEAN countries. But, the Dialogue Relations between ASEAN and the US were not limited to economic dimension. They have also promoted closer political and security as well as social and development cooperation between ASEAN and the US. 
This paper will critically examine the 30-year Dialogue Relations between ASEAN and the US. It argues that, despite of the positive impacts that it resulted in, the relationship between ASEAN and the US tended to be very instrumental. As such, contemporary dynamic of regional politics in Asia poses serious challenges to the relationship between ASEAN and the US. 
The Logics of Cooperation 
Three competing theoretical perspectives are very familiar among the students of International Relations in their understanding of the nature of interstate cooperation: realism, liberal-institutionalism and constructivism. They provide us with three different logics, i.e. the logics of power politics, functionalism and community, and help us to answer the question as to why states enter into cooperation. 
Power politics, the logic underlying realism, is basically a sceptical view of cooperation in the world of states characterised by struggle for power (Waltz 1979; Morgenthau 1985; Mearsheimer, 2001). No cooperation between states is believed to be long lasting because the impetus for such cooperation simply does not exist. In the world characterised by anarchy, cooperation is not an initial step toward closer alliance. No permanent ally or enemy is necessary as today’s ally can be tomorrow’s enemy. Any kind of cooperation is simply a means for distribution of power. In fact, power is the only thing that counts. 
In the realist’s world, only two conditions can force states to cooperate with other states: threat from superior power and coercion by hegemonic power. The first condition fits Waltz’s balance of power theory (1979) or Walt’s balance-of-threat (1987) very well. Both Waltz and Walt argue that an increased power of one state can force other states to cooperate in a security alliance, even with their former enemies. In the context of balance of power, any rising power which makes a state more superior than others is inevitably viewed as a threat. 

Contrary to realism, liberal institutionalism basically has an optimistic view of cooperation among states. Its underlying logic is functionalism which believes that, apart from their competing interests, states have also strong incentives to enter into cooperation. One variant of liberal institutionalis argues that contemporary interdependent world forced states to cooperate. In fact, increased economic interdependence is usually cited as among the most important factors driving for interstate cooperation. Furthermore, it also argues that this increased interdependence will lead to more peaceful relations between states. As states are getting more and more heavily interdependent, they are less likely to resort to force to resolve disputes. In short, economic interdependence have the impact of pacifying and stabilizing interstate relations. 
The third logic underlying the tendency toward interstate cooperation is that of community, derived from constructivist perspective. The main argument of the constructivist is that interest is not given, but constructed. In this regards, institutions and culture play important role in the construction of state’s interests. They are not simply context within which states pursue their interest. They both define the identity and, consequently, interests of a state. As Peter Haas (1992) argues, international institutions and culture change state interests and identities by generating consensual knowledge. 
In contrast to two other logics ─ power politics and functionalism, constructivism seems to offer the most enduring stability in the inter-state relations. As the development of shared identities implies the development a large degree of mutual trust, the logic of community will prevent states from guiding their actions simply on the opportunistic basis of rational calculation. 
The Logics of Cooperation in the ASEAN – US Relations 
Based on the three theoretical perspectives, two different logics of cooperation seem to dominate the ASEAN-US Dialogue Relations: that of power politics and that of functionalism. These two logics were not mutually exclusive, but simultaneously to different degree existed. 
The very first meeting between ASEAN and US were conducted in 8-10 September 1977. The delegation from ASEAN countries and the US were led by their respective Minister of Trade. The agenda was specifically cooperation in trade and finance2. ASEAN and the US broaden the agenda in the second3 and third dialogues in 1978 and 1980 respectively.4 It did not focus exclusively on economy but also on such issues as refugee, social and cultural cooperation. The trend continued until early 1990s. 
Emphasizing economic and technical aspects, the initial stages of the ASEAN-US Relations seem to fit the logic of functionalism. Analyzing the global political context within which the Dialogue Relations were established, one can easily argue that the logic of power politics has also played important role. The ASEAN-US Dialogue Relations were adopted during the height of Cold War. ASEAN for the US was a strategic ally in its competition with the Communist Block in Southeast Asia. But, while the US has been very supportive to the establishment of ASEAN, founded by anti-Communist governments in Southeast Asia, the 

real challenge of Communism in Southeast Asia took place only with invasion of the North to the South Vietnam. The fear that domino effect would really take place has forced the US to engaged more in the region. It is with this background that the ASEAN-US Dialogue Relations in 1977 was established. It is not surprising, therefore, that former President Ronald Reagan declared in his visit to Bali in 1986 that ‘support for and cooperation with ASEAN is a linchpin of American Pacific Policy’ (Conboy, 1987). 
The political and strategic dimensions of the ASEA-US Relations were more explicitly apparent in the 1990s. The eleventh dialogue in 1993,5 for example, included the exchange of views regarding several politics and security issues such as Cambodia, the Middle East, Bosnia-Herzegovina, the South China Sea and Indo-Chinese refugees. The fourteenth dialogue (1998) also explicitly stated security issue such as development in Cambodia and Southeast Asia non-proliferation zone. 
But, the most explicit adoption of the logic of power politics in the ASEAN-US relations began in 2001, following the 9/11 terrorist attack. After the attack, ASEAN-US relations underwent a rather unexpected turn. Immediately, ASEAN adopted a Joint Communique of the Third ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime (AMMTC) on October 11th, 2001. Combating against terrorism constitutes as one of its agendas. ASEAN also adopted the Declaration on Joint Action to Counter Terrorism on November 5th, 2001. In 2004, US announced the ASEAN Cooperation Plan (ACP). ACP is a U.S.-funded initiative that supports U.S.-ASEAN activities to advance mutual interests in areas such as promoting trade and countering transnational crime, including terrorism, human trafficking, and infectious diseases; and fostering ASEAN economic integration and development (US Governmenet Fact Sheet, 2005)6. This was completed with the Joint Vision Statement on the ASEAN-US Enhanced Partnership. This partnership is a mix of political, security, economic, social and development cooperation, something that would never had happened three decades ago7. 
The Challenges Facing ASEAN-US Relations 
Critical analysis clearly shows that the ASEAN-US Relations were based mainly on the logic of power politics and of functionalism. Despite the difference between the two logics, they both are instrumental in character, in the sense that interests (understood respectively as political and material interest) motivates ASEAN and the US to cooperate very closely. But, while the two logics may be very important or necessary for cooperation to take place, they are not sufficient to produce long lasting interstate cooperation (Sugiono, 1997). A long lasting cooperation can only be build upon the more important foundation than simply interest. Trust and shared norms are among the most important aspects that the parties have to have in order to maintain long lasting relationship. Unfortunately, the ASEAN-US Relations have not reached such a phase where trust and shared norms rule. 
The reaction to the decision of President Bush to skip ASEAN meeting in Singapore and, earlier, the absence of the Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in the ASEAN Regional Forum in Manila August, are but two small examples showing how trust between the two 
parties has not yet fully developed. For many in ASEAN, the two cases were seen as the sign of inattentiveness of the US government or indicate that the US is only concerned with its own interest. ASEAN is only relevant so long as the neglect of it could jeopardize US interest (VOA News, 2007). More importantly, the tendency of the US government to deal bilaterally with individual ASEAN member states rather than with ASEAN collectively on various issues such as economy and security do not help the US to win trust among ASEAN people. On the other hand, the admission of Burma in 1997 into ASEAN was seen, from the US perspective, as counterproductive. It shows the insensitivity of the ASEAN to the concern of international society over political situation in this country. As such, ASEAN and the US clearly work with quite different norms. 
While it does not necessarily poses immediate threat to the relations between ASEAN and the US in the near future, the lack of trust will lead to serious problem in the longer future. Amid the rise of China as regional power both ASEAN and the US have to devote more effort to bring more trust to each other. They cannot take their common interest for granted. Common interest in containing Communism during the Cold War and in combating terrorism after the terrorist attack in 2001 have no doubt brought the two parties together. But, beyond these immediate interests, the two parties need more substantial logic of cooperation, i.e. the logic that bring more trust and shared norms. 
References 
Conboy, Kenneth J., ‘Challenges to the US -ASEAN Quasi-Alliance,’ Asian Studies Backgrounder Nr. 60, April 21st, 1987. 
Haas, Peter, ‘Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International Policy Coordination,’ International Organization, 1992. 
Mearsheimer, John J., The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, Norton, New York, 2001. 
Morgenthau, Hans J., Politics Among Nations, McGraw-Hill, New York, 6th edition, 1985. 
Sugiono, Muhadi, ‘Logics for Peace : ASEAN and the Region of Peace in Southeast Asia,’ working paper, presented in the International Conference ASEAN in Its Fortieth Year:Looking Back, Looking Forward, Hanoi, July 2007. 
US Department of State, The United States And The Association Of Southeast Asian Nations: Thirty Years Of Dialogue And Cooperation, Bureau of Public Affairs, July 27th, 2007. 
VOA News, July 25th, 2007. 
Waltz, Kenneth, Theory of International Politics, Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley, 1979. 
4
