Defense transformation is an ambiguous but nevertheless bounded term. Generally, it is
much more than the mere modernization of a country's armed forces; rather, it is
seen as a discontinuous or disruptive change in the character and conduct of
warfare occurring when new technologies are combined with innovative operational
and organizational concepts.
Currently, defense transformation is driven and enabled primarily by
advances in information technologies (IT) and network-centric warfare.
Key characteristics of a modern transformed force include: new
command, control, communications, computing, intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance (C4ISR), networked with weapons
and platforms; shared situational awareness; more accurate and
standoff engagement; agility, speed, rapid deployability, and flexibility;
and greater jointness and interoperability.
Militaries and governments throughout the Asia-Pacific region
have begun to consider the promise and requirements of
defense transformation, including transformational concepts.
Most of these typically entail the acquisition, development, and
integration of new C4ISR systems and precision-guided
weapons. Australia has termed its transformational concept the
Knowledge Edge; Japan the Information-based Revolution in
Military Affairs (Info-RMA); and Singapore the Integrated
Knowledge-based Command and Control (IKC2).
Interoperability with U.S. forces has been a key driver of current Asia-
Pacific thinking about defense transformation. This enhanced interoperability
is especially crucial for regional allies as the United States continues
to transform its armed forces-it would permit these countries' militaries to tap
into any progress the United States makes in transformational warfare.
In other cases, defense transformation is driven by considerations related to the
United States but not in pursuit of interoperability. For example, China has devoted increased
attention to developing capabilities for asymmetric warfare using so-called assassin's mace weapons to
defeat superior forces. For these reasons, transformation is an increasingly loaded and challenging issue
with many implications for defense and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
Defense Transformation and the Asia-Pacific: Implications for Regional Militaries
ments in precision-strike and intelligence-gathering, surveillance,
and reconnaissance (ISR).
In particular, the ADF places increasing emphasis on NCW as
a means to gain an edge over potential competitors in the region.
The Knowledge Edge concept is defined as the effective exploitation
of IT to allow the ADF to use its relatively small force to
maximum effectiveness. NCW is intended not only to provide the
ADF with a force multiplier to maintain a technological edge over
its much larger potential adversaries (such as Indonesia), but also
to enhance cooperation and interoperability with U.S. forces. In
this regard, Australia seeks to leverage its limited indigenous
high-technology core competencies--such as its Jindalee overthe-
horizon radar network (JORN)--in collaborative weapons programs
with the United States.
China has also been particularly influenced by the emerging
IT-based RMA. Beijing is currently engaged in a determined
effort to modernize its armed forces, the People's Liberation Army
(PLA), in order to fight and win limited wars under high-tech conditions.
This doctrine revolves around short-duration, high-intensity
conflicts characterized by mobility, speed, and long-range
attack; employs joint operations fought simultaneously throughout
the entire air, land, sea, space, and electromagnetic battle
space; and relies heavily upon extremely lethal high-technology
weapons. PLA operational doctrine also emphasizes preemption,
surprise, and shock value since the earliest stages of conflict may
be crucial to the outcome of a war.
In this regard, Beijing sees considerable potential for force
multipliers in such areas as information warfare, digitization of
the battlefield, and networked systems. As already mentioned,
China is greatly expanding its C4ISR capabilities. At the same
time, adversaries who are highly dependent upon advanced technology
(such as the United States) are seen as susceptible to lowtech
countermeasures or attacks on their own command, control,
and communications capabilities. Consequently, the PLA has
devoted increasing attention to the development of asymmetric
responses aimed at enabling "the inferior to defeat the superior."
These systems are sometimes lumped together and referred to as
assassin's mace or trump card weapons. Some assassin's mace
weapons are intended to attack an enemy's vulnerabilities such as
computer networks. Information warfare (IW) is a new, potentially
critical development in the PLA's war fighting capabilities. The
PLA is reportedly experimenting with IW operations, and it has
established special IW units to carry out attacks on enemy computer
networks in order to blind and disrupt an adversary's command,
control, communications, computing, and intelligence
(C4I) systems.
India, following the events and outcome of the 1991 Gulf
War, began to pay closer attention to the promise and challenges
of the emerging IT-based RMA. Many Indians have become
increasingly concerned about growing U.S. technological prowess
and its near-global dominance as a conventional military power.
Consequently, some have called for India to acquire corresponding,
perhaps asymmetric capabilities to deal with this new military-
technological reality. In particular, this response entails
exploiting the emerging information revolution in warfare if India
still wants to be taken seriously as a regional and global power,
and if it still wants to have a fighting chance in future conflicts. In
this regard, India's rapidly growing IT sector is seen as playing a
critical role in this effort.
Japan's interest in defense transformation has much of its
roots in the 1998 North Korean Taepo Dong missile test, which
alerted Tokyo of the need to reform and reorient its Self-Defense
Forces (SDF) to new threats, particularly ballistic missiles and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Other concerns
affecting Japan's interest in transformation include the possibility
of cyber attacks on its national information infrastructure,
the likely expansion of SDF involvement in international military
operations (such as in Iraq), and increased military cooperation
with the United States in regional security undertakings.
The Japan Defense Agency (JDA) has designated its transformational
concept the Info-RMA. The Info-RMA is based on
the premise that future warfare will be characterized by a huge
leap in battle space awareness capability, precision-strike engagements,
coordinated attacks by widely dispersed small units, the
heavy use of cyberspace and unmanned battlefield systems, the
expansion of the operational theater and increased speed, and the
move from attrition to decisive (often called effects-based) warfare.
The Info-RMA, according to JDA, is based on the application
of advanced IT to the military sphere and entails informationsharing
through the creation of an all-inclusive C4ISR network;
greater jointness and speed (particularly when it comes to command
and control); increased combat efficiency and effectiveness;
greater organizational flexibility; the protection of critical information
systems (such as command and control nodes); and
expanded interoperability with U.S. forces. The objective of this
Info-RMA is a quantum leap in the efficient achievement of military
objectives.
Many of the principles of the Info-RMA can be found in the
SDF's future defense capabilities requirements. In particular, the
JDA's 2003 defense posture review calls for the SDF to construct
a joint information-sharing network for its ground, sea, and air
self-defense forces; shift from a scale-oriented force structure to a
technology-oriented force (i.e., use technology as a force multiplier);
and maintain interoperability with the United States by
catching up with U.S. force modernization and digitization. In
addition, Japan plans to greatly increase its missile defense initiatives,
such as upgrading its naval Aegis systems to defend against
missile attacks and expanding cooperation with the United States
on joint missile defense research and development (R&D). In fact,
missile defense could become a catalyst for defense transformation
in Japan since it could effect critical policy changes (e.g.,
amending Article 9 of Japan's constitution in order to permit
expanded U.S.-Japan cooperation in collective self-defense), promote
the acquisition of a joint SDF C4ISR network, and help
reform Japan's defense R&D and industrial infrastructure.
Singapore's interest in defense transformation stems both
from its strategic weaknesses--lack of strategic depth, a small and
aging population, and relatively limited defense resources--and its
economic and technological advantages, particularly a highly educated
workforce and its IT sector. Singapore's Ministry of
Defense (MINDEF) recognizes the criticality of IT as perhaps the
most decisive factor in future conflict, as noted in its 2000 defense
policy document, Defending Singapore in the 21st Century:
[The IT-led RMA will] change the nature of warfare. Superior
numbers in platforms...will become less of an advantage unless
all these platforms can be integrated into a unified, flexible, and
effective fighting system using advanced information technologies.
At the same time, the ever-increasing reliance upon information
technology means that protecting one's own information
systems and disrupting the enemy's will become a major aspect of
warfare.
Accordingly, Singapore transformational efforts--the
Integrated Knowledge-based Command and Control (IKC2) doctrinal
concept--emphasize the acquisition, development, and integration
of technologies for command and control with ISR systems
and precision-guided weapons. RMA-related areas where
MINDEF is currently focusing much of its efforts include
advanced electronics and signal processing, information systems
security, advanced guidance systems, communications, electronic
warfare, sensors, and unmanned vehicles.
To better aid the transformation of Singapore's armed forces
3
Defense Transformation and the Asia-Pacific: Implications for Regional Militaries
along the lines of the IKC2 concept, MINDEF has established a
Future Systems Directorate (FSD) and a Center for Military
Experimentation (CME). These two organizations are tasked with
helping to implement Singapore's proposed IKC2 concept.
South Korea and Taiwan both appear to be still at the early
conceptualization stage of defense transformation. The Republic of
Korea (ROK) armed forces are conscious of the fact that future
warfare will be quite different from today: nonlinear, small-scale,
nonconcentrative, and far-separated. Consequently, future military
forces need to develop improved capabilities for C4ISR, including
the networking of platforms, unmanned systems, and real-time
command and control as well as enhanced capacities for precisionstrike.
Additionally, the ROK-U.S. alliance is undergoing a shift
with South Korea expected to play a larger role in its defense. Seoul
is interested in exploring ways to be more self-reliant (particularly
when it comes to early warning, intelligence, and surveillance) and
still be an interoperable partner with U.S. forces. Nevertheless, it is
generally agreed that the Korean RMA is still very much at the
starting line.
Taiwan's RMA is largely predicated on Chinese threat scenarios
and, therefore, is very much influenced by Chinese thinking
about the RMA. Not surprisingly, Taipei is very concerned about
defending against a missile strike and securing its command and
control network from PLA attacks while also engaging in offensive
information warfare against China. Elements of such a doctrine
include early warning systems, reconnaissance capabilities, and an
integrated and secure command and control system, along with
antimissile interceptors and possibly retaliatory ballistic missile
systems.
In their efforts to implement an RMA, Seoul and Taipei are
aided by the presence of large and growing IT sectors. South Korea
and Taiwan are both highly wired in terms of cable and cellular systems,
Internet use, and electronics industries. In particular, they
possess sizable manufacturing bases in the fields of computers and
telecommunications. Together they dominate the global production
of dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) semiconductor chips.
Conclusion
Defense transformation has many implications for Asia-
Pacific militaries. At the very least, the introduction of new technologies
and new armaments promises to significantly affect strategy
and operations on tomorrow's battlefield and hence alter the
determinants of critical capabilities in modern warfare. Asia-
Pacific militaries are clearly acquiring greater lethality and accuracy
at greater ranges, improved battlefield knowledge and command
and control, and increased operational maneuver and speed.
Standoff precision-guided weapons, such as cruise and ballistic
missiles and Global Positioning Systems (GPS)-homing guided
munitions, have greatly increased combat firepower and effectiveness.
The addition of modern submarines and surface combatants,
amphibious assault ships, air-refueled combat aircraft, and transport
aircraft have extended these militaries' theoretical range of
action. Advanced reconnaissance and surveillance platforms have
considerably expanded their capacities to look over the horizon and
in all three dimensions. Through the increased use of stealth and
active defenses (such as missile defense and longer-range air-to-air
missiles), local militaries are significantly adding to their survivability
and operational capabilities. Consequently, conflict in the
region (should it occur) would likely be more high-tech: faster,
more long-distance and yet more precise, and perhaps more devastating
in its effect.
Defense transformation also has the potential to greatly affect
future interoperability between the United States and allied forces
in the region. Interoperability has been a key factor driving much
of the current thinking about defense transformation in the Asia-
Pacific. U.S. allies and friendly partners in the region--Australia,
Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan--are considering transformations
of their respective militaries in order to remain compatible with
U.S. forces, particularly as the likelihood of coalition operations
with the United States (such as in Iraq and Afghanistan) is expanding.
This enhanced interoperability is especially crucial for regional
allies as the United States continues to transform its armed
forces; it would permit these countries' militaries to tap into and
take advantage of U.S. progress in transformational warfare. For
example, Australia, Japan, and South Korea are all acquiring the
Aegis combat system, which could enable their ships to link up
with U.S. naval forces in cooperative engagements against opposing
forces or, as in the case of Australia and Japan, permit it to work
with the United States in developing and deploying ship-based missile
defenses. At the same time, defense transformation on the part
of key U.S. allies and friendly countries in the Asia-Pacific could
greatly benefit the United States by strengthening bilateral military
alliances and burden-sharing with U.S. forces in the region.
Defense transformation means much more than the mere modernization
of a country's armed forces; it is, in fact, the very promise
of a paradigm shift in the character and conduct of warfare. For
this reason, defense transformation entails more than simply overlaying
new technologies and new hardware over existing force
structures; rather, it also demands fundamental changes in the ways
that future military will organize and fight wars. For these reasons,
defense transformation will remain a controversial concept, challenging
long-held concepts and cherished shibboleths when it
comes to military organization, strategy, and tactics. Subsequently,
defense transformation has the potential to greatly impact regional
defense and security in the Asia-Pacific.
Defense Transformation and the Asia-Pacific: Implications for Regional Militaries
Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies
2058 Maluhia Road Honolulu, Hawaii 96815-1949 (808) 971-8900 fax: (808) 971-8999
www.apcss.org
