GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN
RELATIONS
Catharin Dalpino
Issue: The Association of Southeast Asian Nations has favorably
altered the balance of power in East Asia by lending collective
weight to the smaller and less powerful countries of Southeast Asia,
all of whom now belong to the organization. However, the inclusion
of Burma (also known as Myanmar) in the group has complicated
the U.S. relationship with ASEAN because of strong congressional
opposition to any contacts with that regime. Although U.S.
relations with individual members of ASEAN are good, many
members of ASEAN believe the United States has been less attentive
than other regional countries to the organization. The United
States is the only regional country that has not adhered to the
ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation, a prerequisite for participation
in the annual East Asia summit meetings. How important
a role should ASEAN play in the U.S. approach to the region,
and are there steps a new U.S. administration could take that
would strengthen U.S. ties to the countries of Southeast Asia?
Half a decade after the pivotal events of September 11, 2001, the
United States finds itself in a paradoxical position with Southeast
Asia and, more specifically, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). On the one hand, relations with several
Southeast Asian governments have expanded significantly with the
U.S.-led global war against terrorism and because of a new awareness
in Washington of China’s rise in Asia. These two factors
sparked a modest renaissance in U.S. bilateral relations with
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 231
Southeast Asia. Washington found new common cause with
Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, and Manila in initiatives to
strengthen intelligence sharing, joint surveillance and police training.
Indeed, anti-terrorism was the wedge that enabled the United
States to resume military-to-military relations with Indonesia. It
has helped to reconfigure and renew the U.S.-Philippines treaty
alliance, although it has proved to be more problematic in the
U.S.-Thailand alliance because of the violence in southern
Thailand in recent years. Counter-terrorism has also created a new
and positive, if minor, dimension in relations with Hanoi, Phnom
Penh, and Vientiane — one that does not involve the complex
legacy of the Vietnam War. U.S. policymakers are not inaccurate
when they say that U.S. relations with Southeast Asia have never
been better.
But critics make two arguments that diminish, if not entirely
contradict, this claim. One is that the global war against terrorism
has created a backlash, particularly in Muslim areas of
Southeast Asia. Surveys and anecdotal evidence suggest that the
image of the United States in the region’s domestic populations –
the now-cliché loss of “soft power” – has fallen precipitously
since the promulgation of the Bush doctrine and the beginning
of the Iraq war.
A second, related, argument holds that China has increased its
political, economic, and security presence in Southeast Asia
because of the current tendency for U.S. policymakers to focus
primarily on counter-terrorism in the region. Although Beijing’s
new Southeast Asia policy essentially coalesced in the 1990s —a
nd received a quantum boost with the 1997 Asian economic crisis
when China reached out to the most afflicted countries with offers
of bilateral assistance — U.S. counter-terrorism policy has no
doubt helped Beijing to deepen its engagement in smaller, poorer
232 | AMERICA’S ROLE IN ASIA
Southeast Asian countries where Islamic radicalism is not a major
problem: Burma, Cambodia, and Laos.1
The growing number of external powers seeking closer ties to
Southeast Asia – Japan, Australia, India, Russia, the European
Union, as well as China – has caused analysts on both sides of the
Pacific to worry that the U.S. presence in the region is diluted by
default. A more specific concern is that a regional architecture is
emerging which could weaken U.S. power in the region, if not
now then at some point in the foreseeable future. Some new
regional groups, such as ASEAN Plus Three (APT) seek to draw a
sharper line between Asia and the broader Pacific. Others, such as
the East Asia Summit (EAS) are more inclusive but require that
members adhere to specific regional standards. For all practical
purposes, these standards are encapsulated in “the ASEAN way.”2
Recently, adhering to them also required signing the ASEAN
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC).
The ASEAN Solution?
In this changing policy environment, a common prescription
for U.S. policy in Southeast Asia is for Washington to engage
more deeply with ASEAN as an institution, rather than with
individual countries in the region. The justifications for this
range from the practical (since many regional structures in Asia
are built on an ASEAN foundation) to the symbolic (since closer
ties with ASEAN would indicate a stronger commitment to
Southeast Asia as a whole).
Notwithstanding the fact that all of Southeast Asia’s external partners
appear to be strengthening their bilateral as well as multilateral
relations in the region, there is some evidence that the United
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 233
States is lagging behind in the regional race. Washington is the
only regional power not to have signed the TAC, the primary consequence
being the exclusion of the United States from the EAS.3
In addition, although the United States has some regional arrangements
with ASEAN as a group – such as the U.S.-ASEAN Trade
and Investment Framework Arrangement; the U.S.-ASEAN
Enterprise Initiative; and the Joint U.S.-ASEAN Enhanced
Partnership – none are as comprehensive or ambitious as ASEAN
arrangements in train with China, Japan, and India.
China is particularly prolific in this regard. The landmark
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
between ASEAN and the People’s Republic of China (2003) promises,
in theory at least, to create the world’s largest free trade area.
On the security side, China has forged a joint declaration on conduct
with the South China Sea (2002), to quell ASEAN nervousness
about growing Chinese naval ambitions; and a sweeping
“strategic partnership” with ASEAN (2004) that includes nearly
every form of cooperation imaginable, from agriculture to energy
to media relations. Japan and India have followed suit in part with
comprehensive agreements for economic cooperation with
ASEAN, both signed in 2003.
The Balance Sheet
Although the United States officially supports robust engagement
with ASEAN, U.S. policymakers often do not hesitate to make clear
their views that the two fundamental tenets of the “ASEAN way” –
non-interference in the internal affairs of member states and decision-
making by consensus – render the group a “talk shop.” The
new ASEAN Charter—specifically the scuttling of an early draft
which would have significantly altered the “ASEAN way”—has
234 | AMERICA’S ROLE IN ASIA
done little to change minds in Washington on that score.
Nevertheless, new and renewed arguments for a deeper and more
sustained U.S. relationship with ASEAN deserve consideration.
Many analysts on both sides of the Pacific believe that the election
of a new U.S. president – whoever it is – will produce a “bounce”
in the American image in Southeast Asia. Both presidential candidates
have had direct experience with the region, and have positive
profiles there. A more vigorous approach to ASEAN may help to
institutionalize and extend that honeymoon period.
Moreover, there is increasing evidence that many Southeast
Asians – particularly those in Muslim-majority countries –
judge the United States as much for its policies outside the
region (Iraq, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and, potentially,
Iran) as for its actions in Southeast Asia.
Without doubt, the United States needs a public relations boost in
Southeast Asia, although it is not clear that ASEAN is necessarily
the best path to an improved image. If the greatest loss of “soft
power” has been with Southeast Asian domestic populations rather
than governments, increased participation in an inter-governmental
organization may not have an appreciable impact. Moreover, there
is increasing evidence that many Southeast Asians – particularly
those in Muslim-majority countries – judge the United States as
much for its policies outside the region (Iraq, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and, potentially, Iran) as for its actions in Southeast Asia.
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 235
U.S. policy toward ASEAN is not likely to alter that dynamic. To
be sure, the United States needs to expand and improve its muchmaligned
“public diplomacy” policies in Southeast Asia, but
ASEAN may be too indirect a route.
A more serious and sustainable reason to increase U.S. involvement
with ASEAN lies in new trends in Asian regionalism. First, the
growing economic and financial nature of Asian regional architecture
will eventually have an impact on American competitiveness,
if it is not already doing so. The proliferation of regional free trade
negotiations, as well as new currency regimes such as the Chiang
Mai Initiative, are moving economic policy toward the regional
and away from the bilateral arena.
Second, ASEAN and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) are moving
slowly and tentatively – but moving all the same – toward new
regional security arrangements. These new initiatives stay well
below the radar of the U.S. security umbrella in Asia, but early
positioning for the United States in this emerging dialogue may be
a wise investment. The ASEAN Concord II unveiled in Bali in
2003 proposed an ASEAN Security Community and urged a more
vigorous role for the group in the areas of peace-building, maritime
cooperation, among others. With Beijing’s urging, ARF has established
an annual defense ministers’ meeting.
In broad terms, the United States supports the multilateralization
of security in the Asia-Pacific region and has contributed to this
trend as well. The annual U.S.-Thailand COBRA Gold exercises
have added new permanent partners and several more observer
nations. Even the over-reaching Regional Maritime Security
Initiative, which foundered when the littoral states of the
Malacca Straits were caught off guard, sparked joint maritime
patrols in the region.
236 | AMERICA’S ROLE IN ASIA
However, beyond longstanding skepticism that ASEAN can
become a more decisive and operational group, the United States
must overcome some specific obstacles to expanding relations
with ASEAN. First is the uneven quality of U.S. bilateral relations
in Southeast Asia that would make it difficult for the
United States to adopt a more uniform approach to the countries
of the region. On the security side, for example, the United
States has two treaty allies (Thailand and the Philippines); a
group of strategic friends (Singapore, and increasingly Indonesia
and Malaysia); and countries where the legacy of a past war
requires that security cooperation proceed slowly and cautiously
(Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia).
Moreover, and perhaps more problematic, U.S. relations with
Burma are not fully normal and, with the military regime’s dismal
response to the May 2008 cyclone and a controversial constitutional
process, there seems to be little prospect for their immediate
improvement. In recent years, proposals for high-profile U.S.-
ASEAN summits have foundered on the issue of representation by
Burma. It is too soon to determine whether recent events in Burma
may weaken the regime’s hold on power. Absent a dramatic
improvement in the political situation there, however, U.S. policymakers
will have to pick their way carefully through new policies
that seem to expand U.S. ties with ASEAN, particularly those that
require congressional approval.
A second constraint is current U.S. international trade policy,
which makes it difficult for the United States to match the pace of
new free trade agreement (FTA) arrangements in Southeast Asia.
With the exception of the U.S.-Singapore FTA, even U.S. bilateral
attempts to liberalize trade relations in the region have foundered.
The U.S.-Thailand and U.S.-Malaysia FTA negotiations are seriously
stalled, and it remains to be seen if new trade ministers in
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 237
each country can resolve some of the domestic issues that have
impeded progress. Nor is there a long queue of prospective new
FTA bilateral agreements in the region. Vietnam has been mentioned
informally as the next candidate. However, a dismal score
on the FTA front does not mean that the United States has not
made some progress in its trade relations with the region. The
Trade and Investment Framework Agreements (TIFAs) with
Vietnam and Indonesia were, in their own way, landmark agreements
and could set the stage for FTAs at some point in the future.
That point may be several years away, however. Even if prospects
were brighter in Southeast Asia, the United States would not be
able to follow through on new trade agreements without a shift in
the domestic political climate. International trade is clearly a flashpoint
in the 2008 presidential campaign, and the campaigning
Congress has not looked kindly upon recently signed FTA agreements.
Moreover, it will be up to a new Congress to decide
whether to renew the president’s fast track authority, which would
be an obvious aid, if not an outright necessity, in the negotiation
of new agreements.
Recommendations and Conclusions
The current discourse on U.S. relations with ASEAN frequently
portrays the United States as a passive actor, responding (or not) to
regional developments and often lagging behind. A preliminary step
toward deepening U.S. engagement with ASEAN would involve
highlighting and extending current efforts from Washington.
First among these is the creation of the position of U.S.
Ambassador for ASEAN Affairs, adopted this year by the State
Department with strong initial encouragement from the Senate.
238 | AMERICA’S ROLE IN ASIA
Although U.S. officials readily admit that the position is symbolic
at this point, serious consideration should be given to its use as a
springboard for further initiatives. The United States is the first
regional power to establish such a position, and there are signs that
other countries may follow suit, beginning with Japan. Moreover,
some Southeast Asian governments are being urged to post their
own ambassadors to ASEAN. This would ultimately create a virtual
ASEAN diplomatic corps that would in itself be a new regional
grouping and a potential coordinating mechanism.
Second is the March 2008 proposal by State Department Assistant
Secretary of State Christopher Hill that the 2009 ARF meeting
focus on developing a common regional disaster response plan. This
would presumably build upon the international cooperation forged
during the 2004 tsunami as well as the increasing tendency for joint
exercises (COBRA Gold, Balikatan) to focus on humanitarian intervention.
The Burma cyclone has made this recommendation sadly
prescient, but it also underscores its timeliness and utility. The
United States should move preliminary discussion of this initiative
up to this summer’s ARF meeting, to enable ASEAN and its partners
to work toward implementation sooner. If a regional response
mechanism is only marginally more acceptable than a Western-led
international effort, as the Burmese government seemed to have signaled,
thousands of lives might still be saved.
Lastly, the United States could reap exponential rewards by increasing
its support for ASEAN’s structures and projects that work with
the region’s civil societies. The “people’s assembly” movement in
ASEAN is in its infant stages, but this channel offers alternative
routes to promote political liberalization and address nontraditional
transnational security threats. In addition, a people-first approach to
ASEAN could in time be a useful instrument for U.S. public diplomacy
in the region, mitigating the disadvantages mentioned above.
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 239
Tilting Toward TAC
In recent years, the willingness (or reluctance) of the United States
to sign the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation has become a
litmus test for greater U.S. engagement with Southeast Asia. To
mitigate problems the U.S. brings to its relations with ASEAN,
signing the TAC is probably the best short-term measure available
to improve relations with the region, and for that reason alone it is
a step worth taking. A secondary, but still important, reason is to
give the United States a seat at the table of the East Asia Summit.
To date, EAS meetings have not produced major initiatives, but
there is growing acknowledgment that the summit is a permanent
fixture in the Asian regional framework.
To mitigate problems the U.S. brings to its relations with
ASEAN, signing the TAC is probably the best short-term
measure available to improve relations with the region, and
for that reason alone it is a step worth taking.
The U.S. security community has thus far opposed signing the
TAC, fearing that its pledge to resolve disputes without force
would constrain U.S. military power in Asia. However, this would
not be the first time that the United States has signed a treaty with
such a provision: the 1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact had a similar
requirement. As in 1928, this language in the TAC could presumably
be addressed with a notification of reservation. A greater
obstacle would likely be congressional opposition to ratifying a
240 | AMERICA’S ROLE IN ASIA
treaty that includes Burma as a signatory. Even if the TAC were to
join the long list of treaties the United States has signed but not
ratified, there would be some tangible value in taking the first step.
In election years, most policy studies focus on an agenda for a new
administration and Congress. Signing the TAC should be an early
recommendation for the new president in 2009. However, just as
President Clinton took the initiative to visit Vietnam in the last
days of his administration, signing the TAC might well be a good
step for a lame duck president. New leaders often resent such
babies in baskets, but this infant might be welcomed as a short cut
to improving U.S. relations with Southeast Asia.
1 China’s growing relationship with Southeast Asia and its impact on U.S. interests in the
region are the subject of growing debate and deserving of in-depth examination. See, for
example, Joshua Kurlantzick, Charm Offensive: How China’s Soft Power is Transforming
the World (Yale University Press, 2007) and Bronson Percival, The Dragon Looks South:
China and Southeast Asia in the New Century (Praeger, 2007).
2 These are essentially a commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes; non-interference
in the internal affairs of member states; and requiring consensus in the decisionmaking
process.
3 Russia has signed the TAC but at this point has only been granted observer status in the
EAS. Some regional analysts believe this is because growing U.S.-Russian tensions make
the EAS reluctant to admit Moscow unless Washington is also a member.
GROUP THINK: THE CHALLENGE OF U.S.-ASEAN RELATIONS | 241

