RI's defense transformation
Anak Agung Banyu Perwita ,  Bandung   |  Sun, 06/14/2009 12:11 PM  |  Opinion 
In recent years, defense forces throughout the Asia-Pacific region have begun to pay increasing attention to implementation of defense transformation. China, for instance, is generally recognized to be at the forefront - in terms of strategy, organization and technology - of conceptualizing and implementing defense transformation. Its efforts, of course, apparently have influenced the current security environment in the region. 
Considering this, how Indonesia should respond to this development, particularly in the midst of the military provocation from Malaysia on Ambalat, is important. 
It is also important for Indonesia to pay more serious attention to this issue, particularly in the light of the recent accidents involving its military equipment (notably aircraft). The idea of implementing defense transformation should also become one of the top priorities for all the presidential candidates in the upcoming election. 
Many defense analysts see this as synonymous with what is termed the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA). This can be defined as the application of new technologies into a significant number of military systems combined with innovative operational concepts and organizational adaptation in a way that fundamentally alters the character and conduct of a military operation. 
Most analysts and proponents of defense transformation are in general agreement that the current RMA and therefore the current process of transformation has been primarily driven and enabled by dramatic advances in IT over the past two or three decades. 
Obviously, defense transformation entails much more than mere force modernization. Transformation, however, is not simply a techno-fix. It fundamentally changes the way the military does business - doctrinally, organizationally and institutionally. Finally, it demands fundamental changes in the ways the military procures critical equipment and reform of the technological and industrial base that contribute to the development and production of transformational systems. 
All this, in turn, requires vision and leadership at the top to develop basic concepts of defense transformation; establish the necessary institutional and political momentum for implementing transformation; and to allocate the financial resources and human capital required for implementation. 
Many countries in the Asia-Pacific region have demonstrated in their military an increasing capability for implementing transformation. The recently published Australian Defence White Paper has also shown this trend. 
According to one report, the four key components of the Australian RMA are weapons lethality, force projection, information processing and intelligence collection. As a practical result, Australia stresses developing and enhancing the mobility, firepower, and sustainability of the Australian Defence Forces (ADF) by expanding inter-operability and increasing logistical support. 
China has also been particularly influenced by the emerging IT-based RMA. Beijing is currently engaged in a determined effort to modernize its armed forces, the People's Liberation Army (PLA), in order to fight and win limited wars under high-tech conditions. 
This doctrine revolves around short-duration, high-intensity conflicts characterized by mobility, speed, and long-range attack; employs joint operations fought simultaneously throughout the entire air, land, sea, space and electromagnetic battle space; and relies heavily upon extremely lethal high-technology weapons. PLA operational doctrine also emphasizes pre-emption, surprise, and shock value since the earliest stages of conflict may be crucial to the outcome of a war. 
India has also begun to pay closer attention to the implementation of the emerging IT-based RMA. In particular, this response entails exploiting the emerging information revolution in warfare if India still wants to be taken seriously as a regional and global power, and if it still wants to have a fighting chance in a future war. In this regard, India's rapidly growing IT sector is seen as playing a critical role in this effort. 
Japan's interest in defense transformation has much of its roots in the 1998 North Korean Taepodong missile test, which alerted Tokyo of the need to reform and reorient its Self-Defense Forces (SDF) to new threats, particularly ballistic missiles and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Other concerns affecting Japan's interest in transformation include the possibility of cyber attacks on its national information infrastructure, the likely expansion of SDF involvement in international military operations (such as in Iraq), and increased military cooperation with the United States in regional security undertakings. 
Taiwan's RMA is largely predicated on Chinese threat scenarios and, therefore, is very much influenced by Chinese thinking about the RMA. Not surprisingly, Taipei is very concerned about defending against a missile strike and securing its command and control network from PLA attacks while also engaging in offensive information warfare against China. Elements of such a doctrine include early warning systems, and an integrated and secure command and control system, along with antimissile interceptors and possibly retaliatory ballistic missile systems. 
Defense transformation has many implications for security in the Asia-Pacific region. At the very least, the introduction of new technologies and new armaments promises to significantly affect strategy and operations on tomorrow's battlefield and hence alter the determinants of critical capabilities in modern warfare. 
Defense transformation means much more than the mere modernization of a country's armed forces. It is, in fact, the very promise of a paradigm shift in the character and conduct of warfare. For this reason, defense transformation entails more than simply overlaying new technologies and new hardware over existing force structures; rather, it also demands fundamental changes in the ways that the future military will organize and fight wars. 
Subsequently, defense transformation has the potential to greatly impact upon regional defense and security in the Asia-Pacific. But the question still remains for Indonesia: How can we follow and adopt this new trend for the sake of our national security interests? 
The writer is Professor in International Relations, Parahyangan Catholic University-Bandung and Director, Division of Global Affairs, Indonesia Institute for Strategic Studies, Jakarta. 

